#
# This file is autogenerated by pip-compile
# To update, run:
#
#    pip-compile
#
alabaster==0.7.12
    # via sphinx
argon2-cffi==20.1.0
    # via notebook
async-generator==1.10
    # via nbclient
attrs==20.3.0
    # via
    #   demes
    #   jsonschema
    #   jupyter-cache
    #   markdown-it-py
babel==2.9.0
    # via sphinx
backcall==0.2.0
    # via ipython
beautifulsoup4==4.9.3
    # via sphinx-book-theme
bleach==3.3.0
    # via nbconvert
certifi==2020.12.5
    # via requests
cffi==1.14.5
    # via argon2-cffi
chardet==4.0.0
    # via requests
click==7.1.2
    # via
    #   jupyter-book
    #   sphinx-book-theme
colorama==0.4.4
    # via nbdime
cycler==0.10.0
    # via matplotlib
decorator==4.4.2
    # via ipython
defusedxml==0.6.0
    # via nbconvert
demes==0.1.2
    # via
    #   demesdraw
    #   msprime
git+git://github.com/grahamgower/demesdraw
    # via -r requirements.in
docutils==0.16
    # via
    #   jupyter-book
    #   myst-nb
    #   myst-parser
    #   pybtex-docutils
    #   sphinx
    #   sphinx-book-theme
    #   sphinx-panels
    #   sphinx-togglebutton
    #   sphinxcontrib-bibtex
entrypoints==0.3
    # via nbconvert
gitdb==4.0.5
    # via gitpython
gitpython==3.1.13
    # via nbdime
idna==2.10
    # via requests
imagesize==1.2.0
    # via sphinx
importlib-metadata==3.4.0
    # via myst-nb
ipykernel==5.4.3
    # via
    #   ipywidgets
    #   notebook
ipython-genutils==0.2.0
    # via
    #   nbformat
    #   notebook
    #   traitlets
ipython==7.20.0
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   ipywidgets
    #   jupyter-sphinx
    #   myst-nb
ipywidgets==7.6.3
    # via
    #   jupyter-sphinx
    #   myst-nb
jedi==0.18.0
    # via ipython
jinja2==2.11.3
    # via
    #   myst-parser
    #   nbconvert
    #   nbdime
    #   notebook
    #   sphinx
jsonschema==3.2.0
    # via
    #   jupyter-book
    #   nbformat
    #   tskit
jupyter-book==0.10.0
    # via -r requirements.in
jupyter-cache==0.4.2
    # via myst-nb
jupyter-client==6.1.11
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   nbclient
    #   notebook
jupyter-core==4.7.1
    # via
    #   jupyter-client
    #   nbconvert
    #   nbformat
    #   notebook
jupyter-sphinx==0.3.1
    # via myst-nb
jupyterlab-widgets==1.0.0
    # via ipywidgets
jupytext==1.8.2
    # via jupyter-book
kiwisolver==1.3.1
    # via matplotlib
latexcodec==2.0.1
    # via pybtex
linkify-it-py==1.0.1
    # via jupyter-book
markdown-it-py==0.6.2
    # via
    #   jupytext
    #   mdit-py-plugins
    #   myst-parser
markupsafe==1.1.1
    # via jinja2
matplotlib==3.3.4
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   demesdraw
mdit-py-plugins==0.2.5
    # via
    #   markdown-it-py
    #   myst-parser
mistune==0.8.4
    # via nbconvert
msprime==1.0.1
    # via -r requirements.in
myst-nb==0.11.1
    # via jupyter-book
myst-parser==0.13.5
    # via myst-nb
nbclient==0.5.2
    # via jupyter-cache
nbconvert==5.6.1
    # via
    #   jupyter-book
    #   jupyter-sphinx
    #   myst-nb
    #   notebook
nbdime==2.1.0
    # via jupyter-cache
nbformat==5.1.2
    # via
    #   ipywidgets
    #   jupyter-book
    #   jupyter-cache
    #   jupyter-sphinx
    #   jupytext
    #   myst-nb
    #   nbclient
    #   nbconvert
    #   nbdime
    #   notebook
nest-asyncio==1.5.1
    # via nbclient
nested-lookup==0.2.22
    # via jupyter-book
newick==1.3.0
    # via msprime
notebook==6.2.0
    # via
    #   nbdime
    #   widgetsnbextension
numpy==1.20.3
    # via
    #   demesdraw
    #   matplotlib
    #   msprime
    #   pandas
    #   scipy
    #   tskit
packaging==20.9
    # via
    #   bleach
    #   sphinx
pandas==1.2.2
    # via -r requirements.in
pandocfilters==1.4.3
    # via nbconvert
parso==0.8.1
    # via jedi
pexpect==4.8.0
    # via ipython
pickleshare==0.7.5
    # via ipython
pillow==8.1.1
    # via matplotlib
prometheus-client==0.9.0
    # via notebook
prompt-toolkit==3.0.16
    # via ipython
ptyprocess==0.7.0
    # via
    #   pexpect
    #   terminado
pybtex-docutils==1.0.0
    # via sphinxcontrib-bibtex
pybtex==0.24.0
    # via
    #   pybtex-docutils
    #   sphinxcontrib-bibtex
pycparser==2.20
    # via cffi
pydata-sphinx-theme==0.4.3
    # via sphinx-book-theme
pygments==2.8.0
    # via
    #   ipython
    #   nbconvert
    #   nbdime
    #   sphinx
pyparsing==2.4.7
    # via
    #   matplotlib
    #   packaging
pyrsistent==0.17.3
    # via jsonschema
python-dateutil==2.8.1
    # via
    #   jupyter-client
    #   matplotlib
    #   pandas
pytz==2021.1
    # via
    #   babel
    #   pandas
pyyaml==5.4.1
    # via
    #   jupyter-book
    #   jupytext
    #   myst-nb
    #   myst-parser
    #   pybtex
    #   sphinx-book-theme
pyzmq==22.0.3
    # via
    #   jupyter-client
    #   notebook
requests==2.25.1
    # via
    #   nbdime
    #   sphinx
ruamel.yaml.clib==0.2.2
    # via ruamel.yaml
ruamel.yaml==0.17.7
    # via demes
scipy==1.6.3
    # via demesdraw
send2trash==1.5.0
    # via notebook
six==1.15.0
    # via
    #   argon2-cffi
    #   bleach
    #   cycler
    #   jsonschema
    #   latexcodec
    #   nbdime
    #   nested-lookup
    #   pybtex
    #   python-dateutil
smmap==3.0.5
    # via gitdb
snowballstemmer==2.1.0
    # via sphinx
soupsieve==2.2
    # via beautifulsoup4
sphinx-book-theme==0.0.39
    # via jupyter-book
sphinx-comments==0.0.3
    # via jupyter-book
sphinx-copybutton==0.3.1
    # via jupyter-book
sphinx-issues==1.2.0
    # via -r requirements.in
sphinx-panels==0.5.2
    # via jupyter-book
sphinx-thebe==0.0.8
    # via jupyter-book
sphinx-togglebutton==0.2.3
    # via
    #   jupyter-book
    #   myst-nb
sphinx==3.5.0
    # via
    #   jupyter-book
    #   jupyter-sphinx
    #   myst-nb
    #   myst-parser
    #   pydata-sphinx-theme
    #   sphinx-book-theme
    #   sphinx-comments
    #   sphinx-copybutton
    #   sphinx-issues
    #   sphinx-panels
    #   sphinx-thebe
    #   sphinx-togglebutton
    #   sphinxcontrib-bibtex
sphinxcontrib-applehelp==1.0.2
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-bibtex==2.1.4
    # via jupyter-book
sphinxcontrib-devhelp==1.0.2
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-htmlhelp==1.0.3
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-jsmath==1.0.1
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-qthelp==1.0.3
    # via sphinx
sphinxcontrib-serializinghtml==1.1.4
    # via sphinx
sqlalchemy==1.3.23
    # via jupyter-cache
svgwrite==1.4.1
    # via tskit
terminado==0.9.2
    # via notebook
testpath==0.4.4
    # via nbconvert
toml==0.10.2
    # via jupytext
tornado==6.1
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   jupyter-client
    #   nbdime
    #   notebook
    #   terminado
traitlets==5.0.5
    # via
    #   ipykernel
    #   ipython
    #   ipywidgets
    #   jupyter-client
    #   jupyter-core
    #   nbclient
    #   nbconvert
    #   nbformat
    #   notebook
tskit==0.3.6
    # via msprime
uc-micro-py==1.0.1
    # via linkify-it-py
urllib3==1.26.5
    # via requests
wcwidth==0.2.5
    # via prompt-toolkit
webencodings==0.5.1
    # via bleach
wheel==0.36.2
    # via sphinx-togglebutton
widgetsnbextension==3.5.1
    # via ipywidgets
zipp==3.4.0
    # via importlib-metadata

# The following packages are considered to be unsafe in a requirements file:
# setuptools
